---
layout: default
title:  "Gravity"
description: "Gravity - Aristotleian, Galileian, Newtonian, Einsteinian or what"
tag: Quantum Electrodynamics
katex: true
---

## Gravity

### Aristotle
One of the earliest attempts to explain gravity, e.g. why things fall to the ground, was that of the Greek philosopher Aristotle's. He explained things were willing to move to their natural places. Apples to ground, air to up, fire even higher and water in between. Quite a good explanation, isn't it? For that age.

### Galileo
It was Galileo Galilei who figured it out that an object will carry on moving with a steady velocity along a straight line. Unless a force is effecting it to take a turn from the line into force's direction. Why does the object carry on straight, that's a bit of a mystery.  
Or has been. Actually, you see, each and every object just stands still at it's own spot. That is when we look the case from the object's own frame of reference. Having two objects standing still in their own frames of references, each object perceive the other moving along a straight line. Just as Galileo had put it.  
When one is stationary at 3D frame, it is still that the time is moving. We'll come to that down there.

### Newton
Isaac Newton then said, that two objects attract each other with a force relative to their masses and counter relatively to the square of their distance. Ok, the apple is falling to the ground!  Gravity!  
But again, this is the hunch we get when we look at it from our own frame of reference, which is more or less the same as for the earth, i.e. ground. If we look it from the frame of reference of the apple, the ground is moving towards the apple. From a passing by bee's frame of reference, earth and apple are both moving towards each other.
So, the apple is not falling to the ground in anywhere else than in our minds.  
But the attraction between those two is there, just as Newton said. But not necessarily exactly as Newton thought.

### Einstein
As Einstein game, Newton's reckoning got into doubt. It appeared to be only part of the thruth.  
Einstein said gravity is due to bended space-time. Space-time near masses get warped. This approach held good on scales beyond Newtonian ones also, e.g. near to the speed of light.  
Here again we meet the affair of time moving in distinct frames of references. The two objects, Earth and the apple, are just standing still on their own frames of reference. But they are approaching each other, nevertheless. The time is flowing though. In the curved space time. Time is just another dimension in our universe's space. Us humans are able to comprehend space only in 3D (+time), but there most certainly are even more dimensions. Curving is likely to take place over other dimensions as well. Whatever it means in the end.  
As space-time is curved, i.e. time is non-linearly related to other dimensions in space, two objects apparently moving linearly to each other in time are not doing so in the end. In Earth-apple case they get closer and closer to each other, colliding in the end.
The warp of space-time due to masses makes the objects possessing the mass get closer to each other when the time passes. That's the kind of a warp it is.  
Analogous to two persons starting from equator straight towards north, some distance away from each other. It appears they are moving along parallel lines, but instead they will get closer to each other on the way, eventually getting together at North Pole. Apparently linear lines get closer and collide in the end on non-euclidean, 'warped' flat space.  
Mathematically Einstein's described gravity in exact formulas.  Like 

$$Rμν−12Rgμν=8πGc4Tμν$$

It says curvature of the space-time is equal to the amount of mass-stress-energy in space-time.  
These formulas have held true so far, so they must be  correct to at least some degree better than Newton's.  
Intuitively this stuff is harder to catch than mathematically. Common images and animations where a marble is rolling on a rubber sheet bent by a bowling ball in the middle, make it no easier. That scene might just be too close to our reality. I have it hard at least to relate the rolling of the marble actually describes the time flowing.

### QED
Below Quantum electrodynamical interpretation is based on gravitons. Graviton field is a permeative particle field spreading out from and to every direction of the universe in the speed of light.  
Earth absorbs and apple absorbs gravitons. Ending up on less gravitons speeding between earth and apple.
Causing gravitons from other directions pushing apple and earth towards each other.  
Some say this isn't causing gravitation, as there is a flaw in this idea. The apple is moving 'sideways' above earth's surface, against the graviton field. Thus hitting more gravitons from the frontside than from the back side. Thus the speed of apple should decrease and it should eventually come to halt in relation to the graviton field. Per this contradiction they have neglected this approach.  
Here, once again, we come to the question of frames of reference. By what frame of reference the apple appears to be moving sideways above earths surface? From Earth's one, as our intuition is the graviton field is somehow attached to Earth's frame. Imagine instead graviton field is attached to apple's frame of reference. From that point of view earth should eventually halt. A contradiction! Something's badly wrong with this deduction. It's wrong and can't be used to rule out gravitons being absorbed causing the gravity.  
Graviton field is not attached to any frame of reference other than it's own! Field is moving with speed of light to all directions. A human on the earth surface hits the graviton field with the same speed from the back, front, up, down or any direction. With the speed of light!  Formula of relativistic speed between two objects 

$$v_{rel}=\frac{v_{1}-v_{2}}{1-\frac{v_1\times v_2}{c^{2}}}$$

should tell this.

The same goes on with the apple and the Earth. Gravitons are hitting them with the speed of light from every direction. Only that Earth and apple both are absorbing some gravitons, leaving less of them in between.  
That's causing Gravitation!

